Good afternoon, everyone.
Welcome to session 381,
Core Data Tips and Tricks.
My name is Miguel Sanchez.
I'm an engineer in the Core Data team.
This is the middle chapter of
the Core Data trilogy that we
have prepared for you guys.
This is the second session.
I must warn you,
we will end in the cliffhanger.
So the purpose of this session is for
you to gain a deeper understanding
of Core Data technologies.
I'm going to go over some best
practices that we'd like you to follow.
I'm going to be paying particular
emphasis on optimization and
performance issues within Core Data.
I'm also assuming that most of you
have some Core Data experience.
Can I get a show of hands who does
not have Core Data experience?
Okay, those people that don't have
a lot of Core Data experience,
it's still a good session
for you guys to listen to.
There's a lot of good content
that you will get out of it.
I'm just not going to
cover all the basics.
And finally,
the content that I'll be talking
about is Leopard content.
So this is all applicable to
what's already shipping and you
have had since last October.
This is our roadmap.
We'll be spending some time looking
at fetching behind the scenes,
how you can optimize that.
Then going to a little bit of
debugging and performance analysis,
advanced property modeling that
will lead us into migration,
Leopard migration,
and we'll finalize with multi-threading.
Let's start out with fetching.
By the way, the counter is not going.
So fetching-- thank you.
I hope everybody in this room
is already aware of the speed
difference between fetching
something from MyO versus memory.
So as your code data
application is going along,
it's requesting information,
requesting fetches.
Some of those will be serviced by
data that you have already in memory.
And some of the other fetches will
have to go to disk to get them.
So be aware that there's a huge speed
barrier between those two worlds.
When you're in the memory side of things,
we're measuring things in nanoseconds.
When we go to disk,
we're now using milliseconds
as a unit of measure.
That's a sixth order of
magnitude difference.
It's actually not a million times slower.
It's more in the thousands.
We're measuring gigabytes
versus terabyte accesses.
But it's still a very
important difference here.
A thousandth time slower
by having hit the disk.
So it's very important for you guys to
realize and to be aware of where that
data is coming from and only fetch the
things that you absolutely need to fetch.
Now, Core Data already does a lot behind
the scenes so that you don't have
to worry too much about this.
For example, as you know,
we don't bring in all of your object
graph when you instantiate your database.
We simply bring in the main
objects you initially requested,
and if those have relationships,
we treat the destination
objects as faults.
So those are like thin shells of
objects which are not fully populated,
and we only fetch them from
disk as you actually touch those
objects and request information.
So we're not pulling in
the whole object graph.
One thing you might not be aware
of is that behind the scenes,
we are keeping a raw cache with entries
with all of your object information.
So here's the raw cache,
here's my fully instantiated person,
and there are the fields
for the person entity.
So when you trigger a fault,
We go to the database and we
populate the raw cache and then we
fully realize your faulted object.
But you must not equate firing
a fault with accessing disk.
It's not the same thing.
Triggering a fault means simply that
we're going to fully realize your object,
but we could potentially find
the information that we need
in the raw cache already.
This is because that information
was prefetched somehow.
It was fetched by another context,
or maybe you even fetched it already in
the code that you're in where you had
returned your object back into a fault.
So don't think that firing a
fault always goes into disk.
The keys for you to control how fetching
happens is through the Fetch Request API.
At a high level, you have an entity and a
predicate that you're giving us.
But remember that you have a lot
of tweaking that you can do within
the Fetch Request that you create.
You can tell us whether you want us to
return full objects or just the IDs.
Do you want us to populate that
row cache that I mentioned or not?
Do you want us to
pre-fetch relationships?
Stop after a certain limit?
So let's just walk through each
one of these specific cases and how
you would optimize your fetching.
The absolutely most optimal fetching
that you can potentially do going to
disk is when you simply want to get
back the count of a fetch request.
So we have API on NSManagedObjectContext
where you pass out a fetch request
and we simply bring back the count of
whatever was resulted in the database.
So we don't create any IDs,
no instance creation,
no populating of the row caches, entries.
The second level up is if you only
want us to give you the object IDs.
If this is what you want,
by default we give you back full objects.
If you only want object IDs,
you can use the set result type in
NSFetchRequest and you set the result
type to be NSManagedObjectID result type.
Now,
why would you only want to get back IDs?
There's a lot of things
that you can do with IDs.
You might be doing a simple
membership comparison,
where you don't need the full object.
It's not an object-to-object
comparison there.
You're simply checking whether
something belongs into a set,
and that set could have come from
a relationship or somewhere else.
So you might not need the full
ID to answer the question that
you-- the full object to answer
the question that you need.
Now,
one important thing to realize is that
I just mentioned that we were going to
get object IDs in the previous slide.
The fact that you requested only
object IDs in your fetch request
does not imply that we did not
populate your raw cache entry.
So we do populate the raw cache entries,
even though you only
request the object IDs.
The one thing we don't do is we don't
fully realize your objects for you,
but the raw cache entries
are still populated.
So if you want to avoid that step,
you also have to tell us to not
include the property values.
So the default is to include the
property values in the raw cache,
and you have to tell us to not do that,
and then we would only give
you back the object IDs.
So these two things are orthogonal,
object IDs with populating the raw cache.
Moving on,
you want to prefetch your data.
Let's say that you're in a
situation where you're fetching
in people of a person entity.
And you know that every
time you access a person,
you will always be accessing the
address information for that person.
So you don't want to be triggering
a fault individually and incurring
multiple trips to the database.
You want to give us the hint
that you're going to be accessing
that information right away,
so why don't we do something about it?
So if you tell us to prefetch
the address relationship when
you specify the fetch request,
what we would do is we would
reduce your fetches down to two.
We would do the initial fetch
to get all the people that you
requested in your fetch request.
Then we collect all of the object
IDs for the related objects.
And then in a single fetch,
we go to the database and pull in
all of the address information.
So now you only have two database access
rather than triggering a database access
each time you're going and each time
you're touching an address object.
Notice that we're not
creating address objects.
We're simply bringing in the prefetch,
the row cache entries,
and then we're still
creating faults for you.
But then later on during the
execution of your application,
when you actually touch that
object and the fault is converted
into a fully realized object,
you won't be crossing
the threshold of I/O.
You'll be getting your
information back from memory.
So this will be a lot faster.
Thank you.
You'll notice in the previous slide that
I said we bring in the raw cache entries,
but we still create faults.
You can go one step further and tell us,
you know what, I don't even want you to
spend time creating faults.
Just give me the fully realized objects.
So you would use the set returns objects
as faults to know it's yes by default.
And in this case,
when we're doing the initial fetching,
we're populating the raw cache entries,
we can be a little bit more efficient
about converting all those objects into
real objects rather than triggering
the faults one by one later on.
So So this is yet another step
that you can ask us to do.
You could also incur fetching
when you're doing deletions.
Let's say that you're
deleting a manager object.
goes away, you save out to the database,
you think this is a very
lightweight operation,
you're simply deleting one
thing of your database.
Not quite.
Remember that a good part of what
Core Data does for you is all of
the object graph management and
your relationship maintenance.
So if the manager is
related to employees,
and those employees' worst case scenario,
they happen to be faults,
you haven't even accessed
them in the past,
but we still have to update all
their inverse relationships and
cascade the deletes depending
on what you decided to do.
So we go out and do the fetches
and realize the objects and do the
correct updating of the relationship.
So keep that in mind.
A deletion can incur a lot of
fetching because we're doing the
relationship maintenance for you.
So if you want to avoid
situations like this,
you know you're going to be
in a situation like this,
you might want to pre-fetch those related
objects because you know that you're
going to be deleting them and you're
going to need to access them right away.
And also balance how often you're
going to be in a situation like this.
Don't spread them out too far,
but also you might not want to do
them right one after the other.
Searching.
We're still in the
fetching side of things.
Remember that one of the things
that you pass down to the
fetch request is a predicate.
The predicate is evaluated
by the database engine,
SQLite in our case.
So you can be smart about how
you structure your predicate.
Be sure that you order all of the easier
parts to execute at the beginning,
at the front of the predicate,
so that you filter out requests early on.
You might want to limit relationship
queries where you're incurring joins.
At the database layer,
so there's still something
that you can do about smartly
constructing your predicates.
One of the heavier things that
you can do with searching is when
you are doing a regular expression
matching and full text searching.
So you certainly get a
lot more flexibility,
but this is heavy compute intensive.
If you're doing a lot
of contains searches,
you might want to complement the core
data store that you have with a specific
text indexing solution such as SearchKit.
And if you do that,
the way that you would bind the two
worlds would be through the object ID.
So the object IDs is what would
be represented in both sides,
and you do the heavy
searching on your engine,
and then you bring back that object ID,
and you fetch your objects in
the core data side of things.
So that's it for fetching.
Always remember where
your data is coming from.
Disk or memory, that's a big, big,
big speed difference.
Only fetch what you need,
and try to prefetch things that you know
you're going to be using right away.
So you're developing your application,
and you get to a point where you realize
that something's not quite right.
Things seem slow.
How do you determine what is going on?
What is slow in your application?
You suspect that it might
have to do with the fetching,
but how do you prove that?
So here are the mechanisms that you have
for tracking down issues in Core Data.
One of the easiest one is to
simply enable SQL debugging.
So we have a default that you
com.apple/cordatasqldebug.
When you enable this,
every time we go to the database,
we're going to log the SQL that goes.
If you guys were in the previous session,
What's New in Core Data,
you saw Adam do a lot
of this in his demo.
So it's a good place also to learn
a lot about how we're doing the
things behind the scenes for you.
So I encourage you to turn on
the debugging and look at the
SQL we're generating as we're
going to the database and how we're
bringing back that information.
So in this case,
we have a very simple example
where we log a line of SQL.
And you see how long it took
to execute in the database.
And then we brought back only one row.
If you see this happening a lot,
you're manipulating your application UI,
and you see a lot of
one rows coming back,
then that might be a hint that maybe
you could batch some of those things.
So you see that the disk
access is happening.
Now,
parsing through all that SQL information
might be a little too complicated
once you get a lot of output.
So another level of debugging
that you can do is by using
the Instruments application.
The framework implements DTrace probes.
We have them in there.
The result of that can be analyzed
in the Instruments application.
You can get information about fetching,
fault firing, I/O access.
So if you use the
Instruments application,
We even have a template,
a Core Data template,
to start your debugging.
If you select that template,
we give you three instruments by default.
There's a fetching instrument that gives
you information as to what's going on
when a fetch request is being executed,
what kind of things we're fetching,
how many things came back.
There's a cache, there is a,
what's the official name?
The Core Data cache instrument.
This is where we tell you
when we're missing the cache,
we thought something was going to be
in one of the entries in the row cache,
it's not there,
now we have to go to the database.
And a saving instrument that tells
you how long the saving took.
So I'm going to walk you through an
example of how you would gather this
information from the instrument's UI.
This is a simple example.
It's GoFetch.
It's available on the ADC website.
You can do it later on after the session.
But you basically have a person,
which is a lightweight entity.
It simply contains textual information.
And then a heavier entity
with image information.
In this case, it's the icon.
The GoFetch UI allows you to
configure a lot of things over
on the left-hand side here.
This is a good place to experiment
with all of the settings that
I mentioned for fetch request.
For purposes of this walkthrough,
I am only going to be enabling or
disabling prefetching of relationships.
The GoFetch UI allows you to
configure a lot of things over
on the left-hand side here.
This is a good place to experiment
with all of the settings that
I mentioned for fetch request.
For purposes of this walkthrough,
I am only going to be enabling or
disabling prefetching of relationships.
The person information,
which is the lighter weight,
as well as the image information.
We're always displaying that in the UI.
And right after I do the fetch,
I drag the scroller up and down so
I reveal more of the information.
During the second run,
The only change that we do is that
we enable prefetching so that we say,
you know,
don't leave the icon objects as false.
Go and prefetch their information so
that you don't do single firing of false.
So let's say we had done this.
What would it look like in instruments?
Here's the first run.
Here's the second run.
And here's the second one.
Let's focus on the
fetching instrument first.
As you can see on the top,
where we didn't have prefetching,
we did a lot less fetching,
and it was a lot quicker to do that,
because we're only fetching
the light instance,
which is the person.
It only has person, first name,
and last name.
So we're done very quickly.
And at the bottom,
where we're enabling the prefetching,
the fetching took a lot longer initially,
because we're now prefetching all of
the heavy information in the image,
in the icon entity.
Well, why would we want to do that?
Why would we want to incur that cost?
Well, because what this UI does is that
we always show the icon information
right next to the person information.
So if we now focus on the
cache misses instrument,
you'll see that as I'm dragging
the scroller up and down,
in the first case,
I am now missing the cache.
There's activity there going on,
and that is incurring a disk access.
Well, in the second case,
where I already did the prefetching,
we're not missing the caches.
So just in terms of namings,
RCM is Relationship Cache
Miss and Cache Miss for CM.
It should actually say to
many Relationship Cache Miss.
So in this case,
we only have it to one relationship.
If you put them together,
if you see these two
instruments together,
you can clearly see how they're related.
Say you're no prefetching.
But then we do the fetching later on,
or lots of prefetching,
and then we don't do
any fetching later on.
So this is how you can gather
information from this application.
As some of you might know,
the Instruments application
has two other main UI areas.
In the detail area,
you will see the beginning and
the end of each one of our probes.
So in the case of fetching,
we show you that we're fetching persons.
This is the kind of
entity we're fetching.
And not only that,
but this is how many we fetched.
So that's all instrumented behind
the scenes for you in the framework.
And if you want to know
where in your code this is,
you simply drag the pointer in
the Instruments application,
and we show you the stack trace.
So just drag your pointer to
where you see a lot of activity,
which you're not expecting.
And then in the back trace, you will see,
hopefully, somewhere in your source
code which you can identify,
and then you can now drill down and
figure out what's going on there.
So that's it for the
Instruments application.
Moving on,
there's a version of Core Data of
the Core Data framework which
is debug for debug purposes.
You can download this
from the ADC website.
You can just go to the download section,
developer tools,
the debug and profile libs.
It's part of the debug libraries that
you can get from the ADC website,
not just Core Data.
What you get when you have this
library on your system is we
enable a lot of the assertions.
So you might trigger,
if something's going
wrong in your application,
you might fire off an assertion,
and it would give you more information
as to what we thought should have
happened and is not happening.
It's mostly useful for when you're
doing multi-threading debugging.
If you're in that scenario,
I'll be talking about
multi-threading later on,
but you would enable the user default
com.apple.core.data threading debug,
and then we enable all of the
multi-threading assertions.
So this is a great way for you
to gather more information.
Once you download the library,
there's one step of configuration.
It's all explained in TechNode 2124.
TechNode 2124, by the way,
it's a very general
debugging in Mac OS TechNode.
It has a lot of information
as to how you would go about
general debugging in the platform.
So if you're not familiar
with the TechNode,
I suggest that you check it out.
But a little part of NetTechNode is how
you would configure the debug libraries.
So the debug libraries have a suffix,
underscore debug.
If you want your application
to pick up those libraries,
you have to set the
DYLD image suffix setting.
You can also set this within Xcode.
If you're going to the
inspector for the executable,
there's an option there to set,
this is the suffix I want to use in
the libraries that you're picking up.
The only gatter here is that
you might have other debug
libraries on your system,
so if you don't want to pick
up all of the debug libraries,
you want to rename that file
to a unique suffix and then
set only that unique suffix.
So we're done with the
analysis and debugging section.
Turn on SQL Logging for learning
a lot about how we're doing
things behind the scenes.
Use the Instruments application.
And use the default,
the debug library if you want to
use a little more help in debugging
your multi-threaded applications.
Moving on, next tip and trick section,
Advanced Property Modeling.
I'll be focusing purely
on three things here.
Non-standard types, fetch properties,
and derived properties.
This is not a full modeling
subsection of my talk.
For that,
you would want to go to the next hour.
Melissa will be doing a full presentation
on better schema design for Core Data,
so I recommend that you guys go to that.
We're simply focusing on certain
aspects of attributes here.
So, Transformable Attributes.
Here we have a very simple example
where you have a car entity,
and you want that car to have a color.
But you want to model
your color as an NS color.
And as you quickly see,
we don't have NSColor in the default
types that Core Data supports.
We have numbers and dates and strings,
but we don't have a color type.
So no worries,
you can select the transformable type.
That's one of the types that
you have available to you.
And that will allow you to model
one of the non-standard types.
So the trick is to use
transformable type.
This is a new kind of type
we introduced in Leopard.
And what we do behind the scenes
for you is that we archive and
unarchive this other type into a data.
So by default, we use NSKeyed unarchived
from data transformer.
We use the value transformer.
But you can use your own.
You can specify within the UI whatever
transformer that you want to use.
As long as it goes back and forth between
an NSData and it's bi-directional.
The one other gotcha that you need
to keep in mind here is that--
The fact that you told us that your type
is transformable didn't tell us anything
about the fact that you're actually
using an NSColor behind the scenes.
So you're going to get compiler
warnings if you start accessing
the set color and color accessors
because we don't know anything about
the actual type that you're using.
So be sure to declare the property in
your header with the correct type so that
you don't get those compiler warnings.
But everything else is done
behind the scenes for you,
the transforming back and forth.
Fetch properties.
Fetch properties,
think of them as kind of
weak one-way relationships.
Fetch properties that are part
of your entity are populated by
executing a fetch request and bringing
that information back as an array
and putting that in your entity.
This is slightly different
from a relationship.
As many of you know, a relationship,
when you're inspecting a
relationship in your instances,
we are treating those as sets.
So this is a fetch request result.
We give it to you back as an array.
It's part of your instance,
but we're also not doing any
relationship management for you.
We're not doing refreshing.
We're not doing inverse relationships.
When would you want to
use something like this?
If you have a smart group
concept in your application,
but most likely when you're
modeling cross-door relationships.
There's actually an example for
doing the cross-store relationship
modeling with fetch property.
It's actually on the
systems that you have now.
As of Leopard, just go to the
/developer/example/core-data,
the iClass example, look in there,
and part of what that example
does is modeling a cross-store
relationship with a fetch property.
So here's a quick example.
We have a collection
entity and a song entity.
Within your collection,
you want to have a property that
represents your highest rated songs,
the songs that you've rated the highest.
But you don't want that to
be a full-blown relationship,
so you model that as a fetch property,
you associate a predicate,
And that would be a fetch property.
Now, remember, we're not taking care of
refreshing this property.
Once we fetch it the first time,
we're not taking care of monitoring when
new songs are coming in or going away
and refreshing the property for you.
That is something you have to do.
So you have to register for change
notification at some sort of level,
be it the object, context,
or controller level.
And when you get that notification,
what you most likely want to do is turn
your object back into a fault so that
the next time you get a notification,
you can see it's not a fault.
And by the time you
access that relationship,
we re-execute the fetch request.
So this is your responsibility.
The simplest case of a derived attribute
is a full name where you're concatenating
a first name and a last name.
But a more interesting use case for this
would be as an optimization technique.
Let's say that you have a
blog entry entity where you
have all of your blog entries,
which are kind of big chunks of text,
those are being stored in
the regular text attribute,
right?
But there could be all kinds
of random stuff in that text
accents and different cases.
So you want your searching to
be very fast in a normalized
version of that text.
So you would model a derived property,
normalized text.
You do the normalization step each
time you set the regular text.
And that normalization step
might be a little heavy.
So you're doing that each time.
But once you have that result,
you can store it in that property.
So you're deriving that information.
The simplest case of a derived attribute
is a full name where you're concatenating
a first name and a last name.
But a more interesting use case for this
would be as an optimization technique.
Let's say that you have a
blog entry entity where you
have all of your blog entries,
which are kind of big chunks of text.
But a more interesting use case for this
would be as an optimization technique.
So you're deriving that information
from original information.
And it's actually
persisted in your database,
unlike the full name
example right above that.
That's just a transient property.
So you're actually doing the
processing and caching that
information and saving it out.
So when you do your searching,
you can do a lot faster searching
on the normalized property rather
than the regular text property.
We also have an example for this.
It's called the right property.
It's on the ADC website,
and it's actually
associated to this session.
So if you go to the things that
are associated with this session,
this is one of them,
one of the ones that you'll find.
This example not only
does the derived property,
but it also does some interesting
stuff with overriding the default
behavior in the search field so that
you can normalize the property before
you pass it on to the fetching.
So take a look at it, we do a couple of
interesting things there.
So that's it for property modeling.
You can model your own custom data
types using transformed properties.
If you want weak relationships,
use fetch properties and use direct
properties as a mechanism for
caching expensive computations.
Moving on,
as you're improving your model and
modifying it to make it more efficient,
you're most likely going to come across
the concept of versioning and migration.
So why is this an issue?
Core Data does everything,
we do everything for you as long
as you give us the blueprint of
your data in the shape of a model.
So you give us a description of
your data and we're able to manage a
store for you with that information.
The moment that you change the blueprint,
But you retain the
data in the old format,
we don't know what to do.
You're giving us an incompatible
blueprint to the data
store that you're pointing.
So this is what we're
calling a version skew,
version incompatibility.
So we don't know what to do.
This is where migration comes into play.
What are the kinds of things
that you can do to break our
ability to read your data?
If you change the name of your entity,
anything having to do with inheritance,
anything having to do with the
properties that you're persisting out,
and the same thing at the property level,
name, optionality, attribute types,
you're changing the
description of your data.
And you already have a data store,
which does not match that description.
So we have a hard time reading it.
There are things that you can change
in your model which do not break
our ability to read your data,
such as the class name that
we're going to use to instantiate
your objects at runtime,
transient properties,
because by definition
they're not in the store,
user info, and similarly for properties.
So what we do to determine, oh,
let me just,
how many were in the last session
in what's new in the Core Data?
Okay, so not that many.
If you haven't heard,
we have the concept of
lightweight migration that we're
working on for Snow Leopard,
but even in that realm,
knowing this content is still
important because this is still
what's going on behind the scenes.
So what we do is,
every time you give us a model,
we calculate a hash digest of each
one of the entities in that model.
It's a 32-byte hash digest,
which I'll represent as an
icon here for easy comparison.
And when you save your
data to your store,
we save that versioning information
as part of the store's metadata.
So once we have that
versioning information,
we are able to check whether
a store is compatible with the
model that you're giving us.
So when you ask us to work with
a store and a particular model,
the first thing we do is calculate
the versioning information,
go to the store and get the metadata,
compare it.
If they're the same,
we know that we have the correct
blueprint to access your data.
So we bring up the stack and
we do what you expect us to do.
Similarly, this is how we would determine
that you did a change,
because after we calculate
the version hashes,
they don't match the version hashes that
are stored in your store as the metadata.
So the default behavior for a
Core Data application with a UI is
to bring up this panel saying,
I don't know how to read your data,
you gave me the wrong
version of the model,
so do something about it.
Fortunately for you,
there is something you can do about it,
and we help you a lot.
Since Leopard, we have the mechanism of
versioning your models.
So models are not
independent entities anymore.
They're actually,
they can have different versions,
and they can be grouped inside
of a higher level model,
a version Core Data model.
So Xcode has this functionality.
You can tell it to create a
new version of your model,
and you keep track of
them within your project.
And we also give you the ability
to provide us a mapping model
that tells us how to go from one
version of your model to another.
And we even have a whole new
mapping model editor since Leopard,
so this is how you kind of
bootstrap the migration.
So what's a mapping model?
A mapping model is yet another blueprint
where you tell us how to go from your old
version to the new version of your data.
Here's an example.
Let's say that in your initial
version of your data model,
you embedded the address information
for a person inside the entity.
So you decided to model persons with
their street and their state inside.
And then later on, you realize that that
was a little inefficient,
you didn't wanna do that,
you wanna have two-one relationship.
So you change your model to now have
person and an address with the address
information in a separate entity.
The problem is that you already
have a store that contains
information in that format.
So you somehow have to explain to us how
you want us to map that information over,
how you want us to migrate
that information over.
You would have to tell us, you know what,
take the person's instances and
create new person instances from that.
And take persons and also create address
instances for each one of the people.
And inside each one of those
new instances you create,
move the age and the name over
into the person instances and
move the street and the state
over into the address instances.
So you have to give us this information,
we can't figure this out for you.
We introduced five new
classes in Leopard.
The top three have to do with the
modeling of the mapping model,
and the bottom two are what
actually perform the migration.
I'd like to point out here that,
in particular,
NS Entity Migration Policy is
a subclassable class,
so you don't have to settle for the
default behavior that we give you.
These are things that you can plug
in your own migration logic into.
So what goes on behind the scenes
when we're migrating your stores?
Well, we start out by detecting
a version incompatibility,
right?
You give us a model which
is not compatible with the
store that you gave us,
that you pointed us to.
So we look in the
resources of your project,
because they should be there,
you've been managing them all along,
and we look for the source model,
the correct version of your model,
and a mapping model that tells
us how to go from A to B.
We pass that on down to
the Migration Manager,
and the Migration Manager takes care
of instantiating two Core Data stacks.
and performs the
migration in three phases.
During the first pass,
we move over all of the instances.
[Transcript missing]
Let's look at entity mappings,
the mapping modeling in
a little more detail.
So the entity mapping needs to have the
source entity and the destination entity.
You can give it a name too,
and you can order it inside
of the mapping model.
And most importantly,
you can specify a custom
policy class name,
which would be a subclass of our default
behavior if you're not happy with
what we're doing for the migration.
Entity mappings are made
up of property mappings.
The essence of a property mapping,
think of a property mapping
as a value expression.
So you provide us a value expression,
we evaluate it,
and whatever comes out of that,
that's the value of your property
that you want us to fill in,
the destination entity.
Because it's a value expression,
you have access to
certain special keys that
by prefixing them with dollar signs,
such as dollar sign source, destination,
manager, entity mapping.
So if you want to access these
things in your value expression,
just be aware that they're there.
And they're documented in the
NS Entity Migration Policy.
Here's a simple example.
This is how you would tell us,
I want you to migrate the name
field by simply getting whatever
the name was on the source and stick
it into the new instance's name.
So just go to the source,
dollar sign source, dot name,
and whatever that value was,
that's what I want my name
property to be in the new world.
Let's get back to the example here.
So we have a source and a destination.
In this case, you would need to define
two entity mappings.
The first entity mapping would
migrate from person to person.
So the source and the
destination is person.
And the mapping at the property
level would be age and name,
where you're simply going to the source
and fetching them from the source.
Then you would need a second mapping
for migrating a person to an address
where the source is a person and
the destination is the address.
And this is where you're extracting
the address fields from the source.
So this is information that you need
to define for us in the mapping model.
You can do more sophisticated things,
such as introducing
inheritance hierarchies.
Say you have a flattened
space with employees only in
the old version of the model,
and you decide to split up your
employees into managers and programmers.
So you can do that by
defining an entity mapping,
employee to manager.
The source is still employee,
but you can associate a
filter with an entity mapping.
So you can say,
don't fetch all the employees.
Only fetch the employees whose
level is greater than two.
Those are the managers in my world.
So the destination instances
I want you to create from
those employees are managers.
And you migrate the entities,
the field level values over.
You'll notice I haven't
mentioned much relationships.
How do you actually indicate how
you want us to re-hook up your
relationships in the second phase?
So here we are at the end of the
first phase of the migration.
We've created the instances.
Now we want to bind the
person to the address.
Your first crack at this might be, well,
I just want to get the source's address.
That's what I want you to fill in as
the address in the destination world.
That's not quite going
to work for two reasons.
One is, if you evaluate dollar
sign source dot address,
well, first of all,
there is no address in
your source context.
Sure, the information was
embedded in the person,
but from a key path point of view,
it doesn't take you anywhere.
And even if it did take you somewhere,
let's say that you had a version
of the model that had an address,
the resulting object is an object
that lives in that context.
And you can't just pluck an
object out of a context and
stick it into another context.
Objects belong to one specific context.
So even if that were the case,
you can't just take that value
and stick it into the address.
What you really want to do is,
you want to answer the question,
What was the address instance
that was created for this person?
So you want to do a lookup.
We do have a couple of lookup methods
in the Migration Manager class.
So instead of using that expression,
You will need to use
a function expression.
Remember,
property mappings are just expressions
that we're evaluating for you.
So the function expression looks a
little more daunting here on the screen,
but the mapping model of UI and
Xcode has a way for you to generate
this without having to type this in.
You only type in the essential element.
So what the function
expression is saying is,
I want you to execute
a call on the manager.
This is where the $manager
access comes into play.
The method that I want you to call is,
what is the destination for
the entity given this source?
So you're basically asking,
given this source and this mapping,
when you were creating addresses
from persons given this source,
what was the address you created?
So that will result in
that instance over there.
So and that is what we want
to bind in the relationship.
So that's how you-- relationship
mappings are a little bit--
they take one additional step.
Migration logging,
it's a debugging mechanism.
We do have a user default,
com.apple.core.data.migration.debug.
Enable that if you want to see
what's going on during migration.
It's mostly useful for the
bootstrapping phase of migration,
when we're determining whether
the model is compatible or not,
when we're looking for mapping models.
So we do a lot of logging there,
and you can see whether,
why we're not finding your mapping model,
or why we didn't find the right source
model that you expected us to find.
So that's it for
versioning and migration.
We do the skew detection for
you based on the calculation
of the version hash digest.
And we do model-driven migration.
In a lot of cases,
you don't have to write a
lot of code or any code.
You simply define it in the model,
and we do the migration for you.
What we're trying to do in
Snow Leopard is to infer some of
those mapping models in certain
scenarios so that you don't even have
to specify the mapping model for us.
But you still need the other things.
You still need a source model.
You still have to deal with versioning,
and you still have to be aware of that.
We're just trying to be smarter about
inferring the kinds of changes you did.
But that's a Snow Leopard thing.
So for Leopard, you still have to provide
the mapping model for us.
Moving on to the last topic,
multi-threading in the
Core Data environment.
What would be the motivations for wanting
to use multiple threads in Core Data?
One of the main ones is that you probably
want to be more responsive in your UI.
You know that you have a heavy
operation that you want to spin off
into the background while you quickly
return to the user in your UI while
stuff is happening behind the scenes.
So that's one of the main
motivations that you have.
We're shipping lots of hardware
with more and more cores each time,
so you might want to
take advantage of that,
leverage those.
Or you can do a lot of importing,
heavy importing.
If you're importing from some
sort of legacy data type,
XML,
a lot of importing behind the scenes,
you can do that by spinning off
a thread in the background while
your UI remains responsive.
One thing that you have to be aware of,
though, is that the fact that
you spin off a thread,
this is not a magic solution.
Just the fact that you created
a thread doesn't automatically
make everything fast.
Always keep in mind,
what are the contention issues
between the two different
threads that you're creating?
So you might have multiple threads,
but if they're all competing
for the same resource,
they're just going to be
staggering one after the other,
and it would be a
sequential processing model.
Here we have an extreme case of that.
We created a simple program
where all we did is allocate
memory in four different threads.
In both cases, we're allocating memory
in four different threads.
It's even a quad-core machine,
so we do have the hardware resources.
But in the first case,
even though we have four threads,
we're sharing a lock,
and we're sharing one single memory pool.
And you can see that that case is
a lot slower than the second case
where we have multiple threads.
So we have multiple memory
pools and a single lock per
each thread that we're using.
You have four threads,
but if you're not smart about
how you're going to be marshaling
between the shared resources,
you're going to end up with
a lot worse performance.
So always be aware of
where the bottleneck is.
From Core Data's point of view,
the element that is thread
safe is the object ID.
So these are immutable objects
that you can pass back and forth
between threads without worrying
too much about what happens to them.
They can't change.
The pattern that we
want you to use is to,
if you do start using multi-threading,
is to have a separate context
for each thread that you create.
So you go ahead, spin off your threads,
but be sure to have a separate
context for each one of those threads
so that what falls out of that...
is that objects belong
to only one context,
and consequently,
they only belong to one thread.
And believe us,
this will make your life a lot easier,
especially when you get down to
the debugging side of things.
There's fewer interactions.
You know that if you have
an instance of your object,
the only code that could have changed
it is code that was executing in that
single thread and not other things
that are coming in from other threads.
It improves the locking because
you're not locking at a very
fine-grained level at the object level.
We can move the locking
up at a higher level.
So there's more concurrency
that can happen.
This is the thread confinement pattern.
If you do follow this pattern,
there are certain things
that we do for you.
We take care of locking the
managed object context and the
context and the coordinator.
Every time we're
accessing the coordinator,
we do take care of locking that.
So even though you have multiple threads,
going back to what is
the shared resource,
in the very simple form of this pattern,
the shared resource is the
persistent store coordinator.
Okay.
So even though you have multiple
threads with multiple contexts,
when they're getting to the coordinator,
for whatever reason,
they're either fetching
or they're saving,
that's when they're doing the locking,
and that's when they have to
wait for the other threads.
But we take care of doing that for you.
So you don't have to
think in those terms.
You simply do what you do,
and Core Data does
that behind the scenes.
Because that's a shared resource,
you might wonder, well,
if I have multiple contexts and
multiple copies of my object,
am I not duplicating my information?
And you're duplicating some information
but not all of the information.
If you remember back to the first section
that we talked about in the fetching,
do you guys remember the row
cache and the row cache entries?
So think of your managed
objects as kind of thin wrappers
where anything that's heavy,
an image or strings,
they're actually pointing to the
entries inside the row cache.
These are shared copy on
write if you modify them,
but so you're not really duplicating
all of your object information.
They're being shared at the
persistent store coordinator level,
and you simply have thin wrappers of them
that are existing in your application.
in your context.
So don't worry too much about this.
Now, how do you want to communicate
information back and forth
between one thread and the other?
Remember that I said that the
thread-safe element that we're
providing for you is the object ID.
So this is what you pass over into
the other threads without worrying.
And in the other thread,
what you do is that you use the method
objectWithId to go get a local version
of that object in that context.
Now you cannot pass objects that
have been recently inserted because
they still don't exist down in
the coordinator side of things.
But you can pass objects that
have been fetched or updated.
So things that haven't been saved yet
are still not in a place where you
can access them in separate threads.
So let me show you an
animation of how this works.
You decide to do background fetching.
So you're going to have a main thread,
which in this case happens to be
this one on the right-hand side.
That's your UI.
It's entertaining your user
so that they don't get bored.
And behind the scenes,
you're doing a lot of heavy fetching.
It's in a separate thread, right?
You're done with the
fetching in thread one.
Now you want to tell
thread two that it's ready.
You can use that information.
You can't pass the objects around
because those are not thread safe,
but you can pass the object IDs.
So you pass the object ID.
The main thread takes that object ID.
and request the corresponding
object and get a local copy
of that object in the context.
You will notice that when
I got that object information,
I didn't go to the disk.
Do you guys remember my first
slide where going to disk is
thousands of times slower?
I only went to the Rokash entries.
So the fetching,
I did get the benefit of doing
the prefetching behind the
scenes in the other thread,
because even though I'm
recreating the objects,
I'm going to the Rokash.
Okay, so this is the shared resource
and the heavy hit on the I/O was
taken by a background thread
while my UI was responsive.
So this is the main pattern that you
will be using for multi-threading.
We lock, so if you're accessing
the store coordinator,
if you're messaging the
store coordinator explicitly,
take care of that, of locking it.
If you explicitly message it when
you're asking us to add a new store
or you're getting object URIs,
when you're accessing
the store coordinator,
just be sure to lock it.
You might also want to lock it when
you want to group a set of operations
and make those visible as a single
operation to the other threads.
So you would lock the coordinator,
remember that's a shared resource,
you do an insert, a save, a delete,
whatever else you want to do,
and then you unlock the coordinator,
and then the other threads
can't do anything at that
moment until you're done.
So that's a way of creating the
illusion that this was one atomic thing.
Another pattern that you might
want to follow is if you don't
want the persistent store
coordinator to be your bottleneck,
you might want to create
multiple Core Data stacks so that
that's not the shared resource.
So you would have multiple coordinators.
Of course, now you're duplicating data,
right?
Now you really are duplicating
the raw cache entry,
so you really do have two
copies of your objects.
But it might be the case where you know
that this thread is accessing one store
and that thread is accessing another.
So there won't be any conflict.
So if there is a conflict
at the store level,
then the shared resource is the file.
So there's always a shared
resource at some point.
There's actually an example of doing
multi-threaded background fetching.
The animated slide I showed
you two slides ago,
it's on your systems.
This isn't something that
you have to download.
You can just go to Developer, Examples,
Core Data, Background Fetching,
and you can see the
code for doing all this,
passing the IDs around and then
getting the fully realized objects
with the ID in a separate thread.
Wrapping up,
some general Core Data threading
tips in Cocoa.
If you're doing undo,
the default settings for the undo manager
are not compatible with multi-threading.
So you want to disable that
in the context by setting
the undo manager to nil.
The groups by event is not thread safe,
so you want to not use that and manage
the grouping of the undo by hand.
So you can't do it,
you just have to do it by hand.
And the second thing about spawning
off threads is that the threads
that you're creating are detached.
What that means is that the main process,
once they're created,
it's not worrying about whether
they're done with their work or
not before the main process quits.
So they go away, they're detached,
so it's not my responsibility.
If I want to quit, I quit.
So be careful about what
those threads are doing.
Because if they're doing
something that is important,
such as saving or leaving your
data in an inconsistent state,
you don't want the main process to quit.
So you have to implement additional code.
This is your responsibility.
So that the main process
is always checking,
hey, are you done with what you're doing?
Because I'm about to quit.
So don't, don't,
this is your responsibility.
Remember, they're detached threads.
In some cases,
you don't care if you quit because
the work that you're doing behind the
scenes is work that you can throw away.
You're doing background fetching,
you're doing cleanup, you don't care.
Tear the process down.
You're not going to leave your
data in an inconsistent state.
So it's a good thing in some cases.
There's also, as of 10.5,
there's NSOperationQueue,
which is a mechanism that you can use
to model these dependencies between
tasks so that the main task does not
quit until the other subtasks are done.
So it's a convenient Cocoa API for
modeling the dependencies.
You can wait for completion.
You can say this task depends on this,
and now I have to wait until it's done.
You can even, you have mechanisms for
suspending tasks that are running.
So look into this as something
that you would use for your
threads to be communicating so
that the main process doesn't
quit and leave you in a bad state.
If you want to introspect the
hardware that you're running in,
you have access to that information
via Process Info or SysControl by name.
So you can ask what your hardware is.
You can't just pawn off threads if you
don't have the right number of cores
or you have a limited set of resources.
If you want to ask, here's how you ask.
And just like the first slide
where I hope everybody realizes
that going to the I/O is slow,
I hope everybody realizes too that
multi-threading is not a trivial thing.
You don't just spawn off a thread.
So educate yourself.
Here are two references
that we recommend.
Even though the first book
has Java in the title,
it's a more general software
engineering book with how to
program with multiple threads,
independently of the language,
so that's a good overview.
The second book is more of a
pattern style kind of book.
And we also have documentation on the
ADC website for multi-threading topics.
So one last thing here, information that
I referenced in this talk.
A lot of what I talked about, in fact,
I think everything,
a lot more of that is in the
Core Data Programming Guide.
This is a 180-plus page document
that you have on your system.
It's very detailed.
It gives you a lot of advanced
information on Core Data.
There's a bunch of tutorials.
There's two examples I talked
about that are on your system,
the background fetching and the
iClass for the fetch properties.
And there's two examples associated
with this session on the ADC website,
the GoFetch to play around with the
fetch request options and the derived
properties for normalizing textual
data when you're doing the searches.
And like I said,
this is number two of three
of Core Data sessions.
At five in the Marina conference room,
there will be the last Core Data session.
This will be the schema modeling session.
And all of the Core Data team
will be available to you tomorrow,
right before you get drunk
between 2:00 and 4:00.
The beer bash is tomorrow, I believe,
right?
So we have four hours of not
being drunk before we go,
where you can ask us questions.
and our evangelist, Michael Jurowicz,
and send us bug reports and/or
use the Cocoa Dev discussion list
for answering more questions.